docs: DOC-2059: MongoDB Self-Hosted Upgrade Troubleshooting (#7572)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/troubleshooting/palette-upgrade.md

[Upgrade Notes](../enterprise-version/upgrade/upgrade.md) before attempting to upgrade Palette. Use this information to
address common issues that may occur during an upgrade.

## Self-Hosted Palette or Palette VerteX Upgrade Hangs

Upgrading [self-hosted Palette](../enterprise-version/enterprise-version.md) or [Palette VerteX](../vertex/vertex.md)
from version 4.6.x to 4.7.x can cause the upgrade to hang if any member of a MongoDB ReplicaSet is not fully synced and
in a healthy state prior to the upgrade.

### Debug Steps

> To verify the health status of each MongoDB ReplicaSet member, follow the below procedure based on whether TLS is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To verify the health status of each MongoDB ReplicaSet member, use the following procedure based on whether TLS is
```
This is actually a question. We used to have a rule in our style guide to avoid using "below" to point to content. It looks like this rule doesn't exist anymore, so just ignore my comment if that's the case xD

Author: Explained in Slack, but this is a gray area. We explicitly state to avoid saying "above" for backtracking purposes, but this is in fact a gray area. Taking the suggestion 💪

configured with MongoDB.

<Tabs>

<TabItem label="With TLS" value="tls">

1. Issue the following command to query the ReplicaSet for its current primary host, extract the Pod name, and save its
   value as `MONGO_PRIMARY`.

   ```shell
   MONGO_PRIMARY=$(
      kubectl exec \
         --namespace hubble-system \
         mongo-1 \
         --container mongo \
         -- bash -c \
            'mongosh \

>                --username "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME" \

Reviewer: Where do the values of these variables come from? Don't you need to export them first? :)
We prob need to export the kubeconfig as well

Author: I will add a note that says they are defined within the pods :)

               --tlsAllowInvalidHostnames \
               admin \
               --quiet \
               --eval "print(JSON.stringify(rs.isMaster()))"'
   ) | jq --raw-output .primary | awk -F. '{print $1}'
   ```

2. Issue the following command to connect to the primary Pod and print each ReplicaSet member’s host, state, and health
   status.

   ```shell
   kubectl exec \
      --namespace hubble-system \
      "${MONGO_PRIMARY}" \
      --container mongo \
      -- bash -c \
         'mongosh \
            --username "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME" \
            --password "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD" \
            --host "$HOSTNAME" \
            --tls \
            --tlsCAFile /var/mongodb/tls/ca.crt \
            --tlsCertificateKeyFile /var/mongodb/tls/tls-combined.pem \
            --tlsAllowInvalidHostnames \
            admin \
            --quiet \
            --eval "rs.status().members.forEach(m => printjson({host:m.name,state:m.stateStr,health:m.health}))"'
   ```

   All healthy members should have a `health` status of `1`. If the ReplicaSet members are healthy, proceed with
   upgrading self-hosted Palette or VerteX.

>    ```shell title="Example output" hideClipboard {4,9,14}

Reviewer: Cool! :heart_eyes:

      health: 1
   }
   {
      host: 'mongo-0.mongo.hubble-system.svc.cluster.local:27017',
      state: 'SECONDARY',
      health: 1
   }
   {
      host: 'mongo-2.mongo.hubble-system.svc.cluster.local:27017',
      state: 'SECONDARY',
      health: 1
   }
   ```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Without TLS" value="non-tls">

1. Issue the following command to query the ReplicaSet for its current primary host, extract the Pod name, and save its
   value as `MONGO_PRIMARY`.

   ```shell
   MONGO_PRIMARY=$(
      kubectl exec \
         --namespace hubble-system \
         mongo-1 \
         --container mongo \
         -- \
         mongosh \
            --username "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME" \
            --password "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD" \
            admin \
            --quiet \
            --eval "print(JSON.stringify(rs.hello()))" \
      | jq --raw-output .primary \
      | awk -F. '{print $1}'
   )
   ```

2. Issue the following command to connect to the primary Pod and print each ReplicaSet member’s host, state, and health
   status.

   ```shell
   kubectl exec \
      --namespace hubble-system \
      "${MONGO_PRIMARY}" \
      --container mongo \

>       -- bash -c \

Author: No longhand.

### Debug Steps

To verify the health status of each MongoDB ReplicaSet member, follow the below procedure based on whether TLS is configured with MongoDB.

1. Export your MongoDB username and password as environment variables.

   ```shell
   export MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=<mongo-password>
   export MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=<mongo-username>
   ```

   :::tip

   Your MongoDB username and password can be found by running the following command.

   ```shell
   kubectl exec --namespace hubble-system mongo-0 --container mongo -- env | grep MONGO
   ```

   :::

<Tabs> 

<TabItem label="With TLS" value="tls">

2. Run the following command to query the ReplicaSet for its current primary host, extract the Pod name, and set its value to the `MONGO_PRIMARY` environment variable.

   ```shell
   MONGO_PRIMARY=$(
      kubectl exec \
         --namespace hubble-system \
         mongo-1 \
         --container mongo \

>          -- bash -c '

Author: No shorthand.

            mongosh \
               --username "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME" \
               --password "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD" \
               --host "$HOSTNAME" \
               --tls \
               --tlsCAFile /var/mongodb/tls/ca.crt \
               --tlsCertificateKeyFile /var/mongodb/tls/tls-combined.pem \
               --tlsAllowInvalidHostnames \
               admin \
               --quiet \
               --eval "print(JSON.stringify(rs.isMaster()))"
         '

>    ) | jq --raw-output .primary | awk -F. '{print $1}'

Author: No shorthand.

   ```shell title="Example output" hideClipboard {4,9,14}
   {
      host: 'mongo-1.mongo.hubble-system.svc.cluster.local:27017',
      state: 'PRIMARY',
      health: 1
   }
   {
      host: 'mongo-0.mongo.hubble-system.svc.cluster.local:27017',
      state: 'SECONDARY',
      health: 1
   }
   {
      host: 'mongo-2.mongo.hubble-system.svc.cluster.local:27017',
      state: 'SECONDARY',
      health: 1
   }
   ```

</TabItem> 

<TabItem label="Without TLS" value="non-tls">

2. Run the following command to query the ReplicaSet for its current primary host, extract the Pod name, and set its value to the `MONGO_PRIMARY` environment variable.

   ```shell
   MONGO_PRIMARY=$(
      kubectl exec \
         --namespace hubble-system \
         mongo-1 \
         --container mongo \
         -- \
         mongosh \
            --username "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME" \
            --password "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD" \
            admin \
            --quiet \
            --eval "print(JSON.stringify(rs.hello()))" \
      | jq --raw-output .primary \

>       | awk -F. '{print $1}'

Author: No shorthand.

[Upgrade Notes](../enterprise-version/upgrade/upgrade.md) before attempting to upgrade Palette. Use this information to
address common issues that may occur during an upgrade.

## Self-Hosted Palette or Palette VerteX Upgrade Hangs

Upgrading [self-hosted Palette](../enterprise-version/enterprise-version.md) or [Palette VerteX](../vertex/vertex.md)
from version 4.6.x to 4.7.x can cause the upgrade to hang if any member of a MongoDB ReplicaSet is not fully synced and
in a healthy state prior to the upgrade.

### Debug Steps

To verify the health status of each MongoDB ReplicaSet member, follow the below procedure based on whether TLS is
configured with MongoDB.

1. Export your MongoDB username and password as environment variables.

   ```shell
   export MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=<mongo-password>
   export MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=<mongo-username>
   ```

   :::tip

   Your MongoDB username and password can be found by running the following command.

   ```shell
   kubectl exec --namespace hubble-system mongo-0 --container mongo -- env | grep MONGO

>    ```

Author: Gotcha! I didn't have TLS configured on my machine, so when I was originally trying to figure out why the command wouldn't work, I exported the credentials 🤦 This has been removed.

2. Run the following command to query the ReplicaSet for its current primary host, extract the Pod name, and set its
   value to the `MONGO_PRIMARY` environment variable.

   ```shell
   MONGO_PRIMARY=$(
      kubectl exec \
         --namespace hubble-system \
         mongo-1 \
         --container mongo \
         -- \
         mongosh \
            --username "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME" \
            --password "$MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD" \
            admin \
            --quiet \
            --eval "print(JSON.stringify(rs.hello()))" \
      | jq --raw-output .primary \
      | awk -F. '{print $1}'
   )
   ```

3. Run the following command to connect to the primary Pod and print each ReplicaSet member’s host, state, and health
   status.

   ```shell
   kubectl exec \
      --namespace hubble-system \
      "${MONGO_PRIMARY}" \
      --container mongo \
      -- \
      mongosh \
         --username "$MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME" \
         --password "$MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD" \
         admin \
         --quiet \
         --eval "rs.status().members.forEach(m => printjson({host:m.name,state:m.stateStr,health:m.health}))"

>    ```

Reviewer 2: never mind 🤦‍♂️ . I was using the wrong envar name: `MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME`/`MONGODB_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME` **instead of** what you wrote.

>    ```shell
>    kubectl exec \
>       --namespace hubble-system \
>       "${MONGO_PRIMARY}" \
>       --container mongo \
>       -- \
>       mongosh \
>          --username "$MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME" \
>          --password "$MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD" \
>          admin \
>          --quiet \
>          --eval "rs.status().members.forEach(m => printjson({host:m.name,state:m.stateStr,health:m.health}))"
>    ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   ```shell
   kubectl exec \
      --namespace hubble-system \
      "${MONGO_PRIMARY}" \
      --container mongo \
      -- bash -c \
      'mongosh \
         --username "$MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME" \
         --password "$MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD" \
         --host "$HOSTNAME" \
         admin \
         --quiet \
         --eval "rs.status().members.forEach(m => printjson({host:m.name,state:m.stateStr,health:m.health}))"'
   ```
```

This is the correct command.

address common issues that may occur during an upgrade.

## Self-Hosted Palette or Palette VerteX Upgrade Hangs

Upgrading [self-hosted Palette](../enterprise-version/enterprise-version.md) or [Palette VerteX](../vertex/vertex.md)
from version 4.6.x to 4.7.x can cause the upgrade to hang if any member of a MongoDB ReplicaSet is not fully synced and
in a healthy state prior to the upgrade.

### Debug Steps

To verify the health status of each MongoDB ReplicaSet member, use the following procedure based on whether TLS is
configured with MongoDB.

1. Log in to the [Palette](../enterprise-version/system-management/system-management.md#access-the-system-console) or
   [Palette VerteX](../vertex/system-management/system-management.md#access-the-system-console) system console.

2. From the left main menu, select **Enterprise Cluster**.

3. On the **Overview** tab, download the **Kubernetes Config File**.

4. Open a terminal window and set the environment variable `KUBECONFIG` to point to kubeconfig file you downloaded.

   ```shell title="Example command" hideClipboard
   export KUBECONFIG=~/Downloads/spectro-mgmt-cluster.kubeconfig
   ```

<Tabs>

> <TabItem label="With TLS" value="tls">

Reviewer 2: Instead of differentiating between TLS and non-TLS, I believe it will be clearer for our customers to distinguish by self-hosted Palette (non-TLS) and Vertex (TLS).

Author: @rrpolanco  TIL! I will make that change :)
